README.md, before:

# Ramulator: A DRAM Simulator

Ramulator is a fast and cycle-accurate DRAM simulator \[1\] that
supports a wide array of commercial, as well as academic, DRAM
standards:

- DDR3 (2007), DDR4 (2012)
- LPDDR3 (2012), LPDDR4 (2014)
- GDDR5 (2009)
- WIO (2011), WIO2 (2014)
- HBM (2013)
- SALP \[2\]
- TL-DRAM \[3\]
- RowClone \[4\]
- DSARP \[5\]

[\[1\] Kim et al. *Ramulator: A Fast and Extensible DRAM Simulator.* IEEE CAL 2015.](http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/LCA.2015.2414456) <br>
[\[2\] Kim et al. *A Case for Exploiting Subarray-Level Parallelism (SALP) in DRAM.* ISCA 2012.](http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ISCA.2012.6237032) <br>
[\[3\] Lee et al. *Tiered-Latency DRAM: A Low Latency and Low Cost DRAM Architecture.* HPCA 2013.](http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/HPCA.2013.6522354) <br>
[\[4\] Seshadri et al. *RowClone: Fast and Energy-Efficient In-DRAM Bulk Data Copy and Initialization.* MICRO 2013.](http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2540708.2540725) <br>
[\[5\] Chang et al. *Improving DRAM Performance by Parallelizing Refreshes with Accesses.* HPCA 2014.](http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/HPCA.2014.6835946)


## Usage

Ramulator supports three different usage modes.

1. **Memory-Trace Driven:** Ramulator directly reads memory traces from a
  file, and simulates only the DRAM subsystem. Each line in the trace file represents a memory request, with the hexadecimal address followed by 'R' or 'W' for read or write.

  - 0x12345680 R
  - 0x4cbd56c0 W
  - ...


2. **CPU-Trace Driven:** Ramulator directly reads instruction traces from a file, and simulates a simplified model of a "core" that generates memory requests to the DRAM subsystem. Each line in the trace file represents a memory request, and can have one of the following two formats.

  - `<num-cpuinst> <addr-read>`: For a line with two tokens, the first token represents the number of CPU (i.e., non-memory) instructions before the memory request, and the second token is the decimal address of a *read*. 

  - `<num-cpuinst> <addr-read> <addr-writeback>`: For a line with three tokens, the third token is the decimal address of the 
        *writeback* request, which is the dirty cache-line eviction caused by the read request before it.

3. **Gem5 Driven:** Ramulator runs as part of a full-system simulator (gem5 \[2\]) from which it receives memory request as they are generated.

For some of the DRAM standards, Ramulator is also capable of reporting
power consumption by relying on DRAMPower \[3\] as the backend. 

[\[6\] The gem5 Simulator System.](http://www.gem5.org) <br>
[\[7\] Chandrasekar et al. *DRAMPower: Open-Source DRAM Power & Energy Estimation Tool.* IEEE CAL 2015.](http://www.drampower.info)


## Getting Started

Ramulator requires a C++11 compiler (e.g., `clang++`) and standard
library (e.g., `libc++`).

1. **Memory-Trace Driven**

        $ cd ramulator
        $ make -j ramulator-dramtrace
        $ ./ramulator-dramtrace dram.trace 1 1  # 1 channel, 1 rank (default: DDR3)
        Simulation done 51 clocks [63.750ns], 3 reads [2.805 GB/s], 2 writes [1.870 GB/s]
        # NOTE: dram.trace is a very short trace file provided only as an example.

2. **CPU-Trace Driven**

        $ cd ramulator
        $ make -j ramulator-cputrace
        $ ./ramulator-dramtrace cpu.trace  # Report normalized IPC for all supported standards (baseline: DDR3)
        DDR3: 1.00000
        DDR4: 1.13072
        LPDDR3: 0.79724
        LPDDR4: 0.65283
        GDDR5: 1.28148
        WideIO: 0.18723
        WideIO2: 0.92021
        HBM: 0.77232
        SALP: 0.91534
        DSARP: 1.00000
        # NOTE: cpu.trace is a very short trace file provided only as an example.

3. **Gem5 Driven**

        $ hg clone http://repo.gem5.org/gem5-stable
        $ cd gem5-stable
        $ hg update -c 10231  # Revert to stable version from 5/31/2014 (10231:0e86fac7254c)
        $ patch -Np1 --ignore-whitespace < /path/to/ramulator/gem5-0e86fac7254c-ramulator.patch
        $ cd ext/ramulator
        $ mkdir Ramulator
        $ cp -r /path/to/ramulator/src Ramulator
        # Compile gem5
        # Run gem5 with --mem-type=ramulator and --ramulator-config=DDR3


## Reproducing Results from Paper (Kim et al. \[1\])


### Debugging & Verification (Section 4.1)

For debugging and verification purposes, Ramulator can print the trace of every DRAM command it issues along with their address and timing information. To do so, please set `bool print_cmd_trace = true;` in the memory controller (`SpeedyController.h` or `Controller.h`).


### Comparison Against Other Simulators (Section 4.2)

For comparing Ramulator against other DRAM simulators, we provide a script that automates the process: `test_ddr3.py`. Before you run this script, however, you must specify the location of their executables and configuration files at designated lines in the script's source code: 

* Ramulator
* DRAMSim2 (https://wiki.umd.edu/DRAMSim2): `test_ddr3.py` lines 39-40
* USIMM, (http://www.cs.utah.edu/~rajeev/jwac12): `test_ddr3.py` lines 54-55
* DrSim (http://lph.ece.utexas.edu/public/Main/DrSim): `test_ddr3.py` lines 66-67
* NVMain (http://wiki.nvmain.org): `test_ddr3.py`  lines 78-79

Please refer to their respective websites to download, build, and set-up 
the other simulators. The simulators must to be executed in saturation mode (always filling up the
request queues when possible).

All five simulators were configured using the same parameters:

* DDR3-1600K (11-11-11), 1 Channel, 1 Rank, 2Gb x8 chips
* FR-FCFS Scheduling
* Open-Row Policy
* 32/32 Entry Read/Write Queues
* High/Low Watermarks for Write Queue: 28/16

Finally, execute `test_ddr3.py <num-requests>` to start off the simulation. Please make sure that there are no other active processes during simulation to yield accurate measurements of memory usage and CPU time.


### Cross-Sectional Study of DRAM Standards (Section 4.3)

Please use the CPU traces (SPEC 2006) provided in `ramulator/cputrace` to run CPU-trace driven simulations.

## Other Tips

### Power Estimation

For estimating power consumption, Ramulator can record the trace of every DRAM command it issues in 
DRAMPower \[7\] format. To do so, please set `bool record_cmd_trace = true;` in the memory controller (`SpeedyController.h` or `Controller.h`). The resulting DRAM command trace (e.g., `cmd-trace-chan-N-rank-M.cmdtrace`) should be fed into DRAMPower with the correct configuration (standard/speed/organization) to estimate energy/power usage for a single rank (a limitation of DRAMPower).


### Contributors

- Yoongu Kim (Carnegie Mellon University)
- Weikun Yang (Peking University)
- Kevin Chang (Carnegie Mellon University)
- Donghyuk Lee (Carnegie Mellon University)
- Vivek Seshadri (Carnegie Mellon University)

Commit message:

Code now compatible with g++-5
* Incorporated changes from @henryzh for GCC compatibility (#3).
* Fixes issue where DSARP refresh functions were not called when
  compiled with GCC.
* Updated Makefile to properly track header file dependencies, as well
  as keep object files in a separate directory.
* Removed libc++ requirement.
* Tested with g++ 5.1.0, clang++ 3.4, clang++ 3.6

README.md, after:

# Ramulator: A DRAM Simulator

Ramulator is a fast and cycle-accurate DRAM simulator \[1\] that
supports a wide array of commercial, as well as academic, DRAM
standards:

- DDR3 (2007), DDR4 (2012)
- LPDDR3 (2012), LPDDR4 (2014)
- GDDR5 (2009)
- WIO (2011), WIO2 (2014)
- HBM (2013)
- SALP \[2\]
- TL-DRAM \[3\]
- RowClone \[4\]
- DSARP \[5\]

[\[1\] Kim et al. *Ramulator: A Fast and Extensible DRAM Simulator.* IEEE CAL 2015.](http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/LCA.2015.2414456) <br>
[\[2\] Kim et al. *A Case for Exploiting Subarray-Level Parallelism (SALP) in DRAM.* ISCA 2012.](http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ISCA.2012.6237032) <br>
[\[3\] Lee et al. *Tiered-Latency DRAM: A Low Latency and Low Cost DRAM Architecture.* HPCA 2013.](http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/HPCA.2013.6522354) <br>
[\[4\] Seshadri et al. *RowClone: Fast and Energy-Efficient In-DRAM Bulk Data Copy and Initialization.* MICRO 2013.](http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2540708.2540725) <br>
[\[5\] Chang et al. *Improving DRAM Performance by Parallelizing Refreshes with Accesses.* HPCA 2014.](http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/HPCA.2014.6835946)


## Usage

Ramulator supports three different usage modes.

1. **Memory-Trace Driven:** Ramulator directly reads memory traces from a
  file, and simulates only the DRAM subsystem. Each line in the trace file represents a memory request, with the hexadecimal address followed by 'R' or 'W' for read or write.

  - 0x12345680 R
  - 0x4cbd56c0 W
  - ...


2. **CPU-Trace Driven:** Ramulator directly reads instruction traces from a file, and simulates a simplified model of a "core" that generates memory requests to the DRAM subsystem. Each line in the trace file represents a memory request, and can have one of the following two formats.

  - `<num-cpuinst> <addr-read>`: For a line with two tokens, the first token represents the number of CPU (i.e., non-memory) instructions before the memory request, and the second token is the decimal address of a *read*. 

  - `<num-cpuinst> <addr-read> <addr-writeback>`: For a line with three tokens, the third token is the decimal address of the 
        *writeback* request, which is the dirty cache-line eviction caused by the read request before it.

3. **Gem5 Driven:** Ramulator runs as part of a full-system simulator (gem5 \[6\]) from which it receives memory request as they are generated.

For some of the DRAM standards, Ramulator is also capable of reporting
power consumption by relying on DRAMPower \[7\] as the backend. 

[\[6\] The gem5 Simulator System.](http://www.gem5.org) <br>
[\[7\] Chandrasekar et al. *DRAMPower: Open-Source DRAM Power & Energy Estimation Tool.* IEEE CAL 2015.](http://www.drampower.info)


## Getting Started

Ramulator requires a C++11 compiler (e.g., `clang++`, `g++-5`).

1. **Memory-Trace Driven**

        $ cd ramulator
        $ make -j ramulator-dramtrace
        $ ./ramulator-dramtrace dram.trace 1 1  # 1 channel, 1 rank (default: DDR3)
        Simulation done 51 clocks [63.750ns], 3 reads [2.805 GB/s], 2 writes [1.870 GB/s]
        # NOTE: dram.trace is a very short trace file provided only as an example.

2. **CPU-Trace Driven**

        $ cd ramulator
        $ make -j ramulator-cputrace
        $ ./ramulator-cputrace cpu.trace  # Report normalized IPC for all supported standards (baseline: DDR3)
              DDR3: 1.00000
              DDR4: 1.13072
              SALP: 0.91534
            LPDDR3: 0.79724
            LPDDR4: 0.71784
             GDDR5: 1.28148
               HBM: 1.07453
            WideIO: 0.65038
           WideIO2: 0.95580
             DSARP: 0.90104
            ALDRAM: 0.91534
            TLDRAM: 1.02367
        # NOTE: cpu.trace is a very short trace file provided only as an example.

3. **Gem5 Driven**

        $ hg clone http://repo.gem5.org/gem5-stable
        $ cd gem5-stable
        $ hg update -c 10231  # Revert to stable version from 5/31/2014 (10231:0e86fac7254c)
        $ patch -Np1 --ignore-whitespace < /path/to/ramulator/gem5-0e86fac7254c-ramulator.patch
        $ cd ext/ramulator
        $ mkdir Ramulator
        $ cp -r /path/to/ramulator/src Ramulator
        # Compile gem5
        # Run gem5 with --mem-type=ramulator and --ramulator-config=DDR3


## Reproducing Results from Paper (Kim et al. \[1\])


### Debugging & Verification (Section 4.1)

For debugging and verification purposes, Ramulator can print the trace of every DRAM command it issues along with their address and timing information. To do so, please set `bool print_cmd_trace = true;` in the memory controller (`SpeedyController.h` or `Controller.h`).


### Comparison Against Other Simulators (Section 4.2)

For comparing Ramulator against other DRAM simulators, we provide a script that automates the process: `test_ddr3.py`. Before you run this script, however, you must specify the location of their executables and configuration files at designated lines in the script's source code: 

* Ramulator
* DRAMSim2 (https://wiki.umd.edu/DRAMSim2): `test_ddr3.py` lines 39-40
* USIMM, (http://www.cs.utah.edu/~rajeev/jwac12): `test_ddr3.py` lines 54-55
* DrSim (http://lph.ece.utexas.edu/public/Main/DrSim): `test_ddr3.py` lines 66-67
* NVMain (http://wiki.nvmain.org): `test_ddr3.py`  lines 78-79

Please refer to their respective websites to download, build, and set-up 
the other simulators. The simulators must to be executed in saturation mode (always filling up the
request queues when possible).

All five simulators were configured using the same parameters:

* DDR3-1600K (11-11-11), 1 Channel, 1 Rank, 2Gb x8 chips
* FR-FCFS Scheduling
* Open-Row Policy
* 32/32 Entry Read/Write Queues
* High/Low Watermarks for Write Queue: 28/16

Finally, execute `test_ddr3.py <num-requests>` to start off the simulation. Please make sure that there are no other active processes during simulation to yield accurate measurements of memory usage and CPU time.


### Cross-Sectional Study of DRAM Standards (Section 4.3)

Please use the CPU traces (SPEC 2006) provided in `ramulator/cputrace` to run CPU-trace driven simulations.

## Other Tips

### Power Estimation

For estimating power consumption, Ramulator can record the trace of every DRAM command it issues in 
DRAMPower \[7\] format. To do so, please set `bool record_cmd_trace = true;` in the memory controller (`SpeedyController.h` or `Controller.h`). The resulting DRAM command trace (e.g., `cmd-trace-chan-N-rank-M.cmdtrace`) should be fed into DRAMPower with the correct configuration (standard/speed/organization) to estimate energy/power usage for a single rank (a limitation of DRAMPower).


### Contributors

- Yoongu Kim (Carnegie Mellon University)
- Weikun Yang (Peking University)
- Kevin Chang (Carnegie Mellon University)
- Donghyuk Lee (Carnegie Mellon University)
- Vivek Seshadri (Carnegie Mellon University)
- Saugata Ghose (Carnegie Mellon University)
- Tianshi Li (Carnegie Mellon University)
- @henryzh
